<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 5.1, http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<title>Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 1.2</title>

<meta name="description" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 1.2" />
<meta name="keywords" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 1.2" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<link href="index.xhtml#Top" rel="start" title="Top" />
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" rel="index" title="Term Index" />
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents" />
<link href="Chapter-1.xhtml#Chapter-1" rel="prev" title="Chapter 1" />
<link href="1_002e2_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e1" rel="next" title="1.2.1" />
<link href="1_002e1_002e8.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e8" rel="prev" title="1.1.8" />

<link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="css/prettify.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<script src="js/jquery.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/footnotes.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/browsertest.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body>
<section><a id="g_t1_002e2"></a>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="1_002e2_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">1.2.1</a>, Previous: <a href="1_002e1_002e8.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e8" accesskey="p" rel="prev">1.1.8</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-1.xhtml#Chapter-1" accesskey="u" rel="prev">Chapter 1</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>
<hr />

<a id="Procedures-and-the-Processes-They-Generate"></a>
<h3 class="section"><span class="secnum">1.2</span><span class="sectitle">Procedures and the Processes They Generate</span></h3>

<p>We have now considered the elements of programming: We have used primitive
arithmetic operations, we have combined these operations, and we have
abstracted these composite operations by defining them as compound procedures.
But that is not enough to enable us to say that we know how to program.  Our
situation is analogous to that of someone who has learned the rules for how the
pieces move in chess but knows nothing of typical openings, tactics, or
strategy.  Like the novice chess player, we don’t yet know the common patterns
of usage in the domain.  We lack the knowledge of which moves are worth making
(which procedures are worth defining).  We lack the experience to predict the
consequences of making a move (executing a procedure).
</p>
<p>The ability to visualize the consequences of the actions under consideration is
crucial to becoming an expert programmer, just as it is in any synthetic,
creative activity.  In becoming an expert photographer, for example, one must
learn how to look at a scene and know how dark each region will appear on a
print for each possible choice of exposure and development conditions.  Only
then can one reason backward, planning framing, lighting, exposure, and
development to obtain the desired effects.  So it is with programming, where we
are planning the course of action to be taken by a process and where we control
the process by means of a program.  To become experts, we must learn to
visualize the processes generated by various types of procedures.  Only after
we have developed such a skill can we learn to reliably construct programs that
exhibit the desired behavior.
</p>
<p>A procedure is a pattern for the <a id="index-local-evolution"></a>
<em>local evolution</em> of a computational
process.  It specifies how each stage of the process is built upon the previous
stage.  We would like to be able to make statements about the overall, or
<a id="index-global"></a>
<em>global</em>, behavior of a process whose local evolution has been
specified by a procedure.  This is very difficult to do in general, but we can
at least try to describe some typical patterns of process evolution.
</p>
<p>In this section we will examine some common “shapes” for processes generated
by simple procedures.  We will also investigate the rates at which these
processes consume the important computational resources of time and space.  The
procedures we will consider are very simple.  Their role is like that played by
test patterns in photography: as oversimplified prototypical patterns, rather
than practical examples in their own right.
</p>
<table class="menu" style="border-collapse: collapse; border-spacing: 0">
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e2_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e1" accesskey="1">1.2.1</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Linear Recursion and Iteration
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e2_002e2.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e2" accesskey="2">1.2.2</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Tree Recursion
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e2_002e3.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e3" accesskey="3">1.2.3</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Orders of Growth
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e2_002e4.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e4" accesskey="4">1.2.4</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Exponentiation
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e2_002e5.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e5" accesskey="5">1.2.5</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Greatest Common Divisors
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e2_002e6.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e6" accesskey="6">1.2.6</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Example: Testing for Primality
</td></tr>
</table>

<hr />
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="1_002e2_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">1.2.1</a>, Previous: <a href="1_002e1_002e8.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e8" accesskey="p" rel="prev">1.1.8</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-1.xhtml#Chapter-1" accesskey="u" rel="prev">Chapter 1</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>


</section>
</body>
</html>