<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 5.1, http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<title>Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 1.1</title>

<meta name="description" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 1.1" />
<meta name="keywords" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 1.1" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<link href="index.xhtml#Top" rel="start" title="Top" />
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" rel="index" title="Term Index" />
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents" />
<link href="Chapter-1.xhtml#Chapter-1" rel="prev" title="Chapter 1" />
<link href="1_002e1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e1" rel="next" title="1.1.1" />
<link href="Chapter-1.xhtml#Chapter-1" rel="prev" title="Chapter 1" />

<link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="css/prettify.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<script src="js/jquery.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/footnotes.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/browsertest.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body>
<section><a id="g_t1_002e1"></a>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="1_002e1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">1.1.1</a>, Previous: <a href="Chapter-1.xhtml#Chapter-1" accesskey="p" rel="prev">Chapter 1</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-1.xhtml#Chapter-1" accesskey="u" rel="prev">Chapter 1</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>
<hr />

<a id="The-Elements-of-Programming"></a>
<h3 class="section"><span class="secnum">1.1</span><span class="sectitle">The Elements of Programming</span></h3>

<p>A powerful programming language is more than just a means for instructing a
computer to perform tasks.  The language also serves as a framework within
which we organize our ideas about processes.  Thus, when we describe a
language, we should pay particular attention to the means that the language
provides for combining simple ideas to form more complex ideas.  Every powerful
language has three mechanisms for accomplishing this:
</p>
<ul>
<li> <b>primitive expressions</b>,
which represent the simplest entities the language is concerned with,

</li><li> <b>means of combination</b>,
by which compound elements are built from simpler ones, and

</li><li> <b>means of abstraction</b>,
by which compound elements can be named and manipulated as units.

</li></ul>

<p>In programming, we deal with two kinds of elements: procedures and data. (Later
we will discover that they are really not so distinct.)  Informally, data is
“stuff” that we want to manipulate, and procedures are descriptions of the
rules for manipulating the data.  Thus, any powerful programming language
should be able to describe primitive data and primitive procedures and should
have methods for combining and abstracting procedures and data.
</p>
<p>In this chapter we will deal only with simple numerical data so that we can
focus on the rules for building procedures.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF4" href="#FOOT4"><sup>4</sup></a> In later chapters we will see that these
same rules allow us to build procedures to manipulate compound data as well.
</p>
<table class="menu" style="border-collapse: collapse; border-spacing: 0">
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e1" accesskey="1">1.1.1</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Expressions
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e1_002e2.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e2" accesskey="2">1.1.2</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Naming and the Environment
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e1_002e3.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e3" accesskey="3">1.1.3</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Evaluating Combinations
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e1_002e4.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e4" accesskey="4">1.1.4</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Compound Procedures
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e1_002e5.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e5" accesskey="5">1.1.5</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">The Substitution Model for Procedure Application
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e1_002e6.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e6" accesskey="6">1.1.6</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Conditional Expressions and Predicates
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e1_002e7.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e7" accesskey="7">1.1.7</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Example: Square Roots by Newton’s Method
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="1_002e1_002e8.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e8" accesskey="8">1.1.8</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Procedures as Black-Box Abstractions
</td></tr>
</table>

<div class="footnote">
<hr />

<h4 class="footnotes-heading">Footnotes</h4>

<div id="FOOT4"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF4"><sup>4</sup></a>
The characterization of
numbers as “simple data” is a barefaced bluff.  In fact, the treatment of
numbers is one of the trickiest and most confusing aspects of any programming
language.  Some typical issues involved are these: Some computer systems
distinguish <a id="index-integers"></a>
<em>integers</em>, such as 2, from <a id="index-real-numbers"></a>
<em>real numbers</em>, such as
2.71.  Is the real number 2.00 different from the integer 2?  Are the
arithmetic operations used for integers the same as the operations used for
real numbers?  Does 6 divided by 2 produce 3, or 3.0?  How large a number can
we represent?  How many decimal places of accuracy can we represent?  Is the
range of integers the same as the range of real numbers?  Above and beyond
these questions, of course, lies a collection of issues concerning roundoff and
truncation errors—the entire science of numerical analysis.  Since our focus
in this book is on large-scale program design rather than on numerical
techniques, we are going to ignore these problems.  The numerical examples in
this chapter will exhibit the usual roundoff behavior that one observes when
using arithmetic operations that preserve a limited number of decimal places of
accuracy in noninteger operations.</p>
</div>
</div>
<hr />
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="1_002e1_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">1.1.1</a>, Previous: <a href="Chapter-1.xhtml#Chapter-1" accesskey="p" rel="prev">Chapter 1</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-1.xhtml#Chapter-1" accesskey="u" rel="prev">Chapter 1</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>


</section>
</body>
</html>