<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 5.1, http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<title>Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 3.1.3</title>

<meta name="description" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 3.1.3" />
<meta name="keywords" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 3.1.3" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<link href="index.xhtml#Top" rel="start" title="Top" />
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" rel="index" title="Term Index" />
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents" />
<link href="3_002e1.xhtml#g_t3_002e1" rel="prev" title="3.1" />
<link href="3_002e2.xhtml#g_t3_002e2" rel="next" title="3.2" />
<link href="3_002e1_002e2.xhtml#g_t3_002e1_002e2" rel="prev" title="3.1.2" />

<link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="css/prettify.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<script src="js/jquery.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/footnotes.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/browsertest.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body>
<section><a id="g_t3_002e1_002e3"></a>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="3_002e2.xhtml#g_t3_002e2" accesskey="n" rel="next">3.2</a>, Previous: <a href="3_002e1_002e2.xhtml#g_t3_002e1_002e2" accesskey="p" rel="prev">3.1.2</a>, Up: <a href="3_002e1.xhtml#g_t3_002e1" accesskey="u" rel="prev">3.1</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>
<hr />

<a id="The-Costs-of-Introducing-Assignment"></a>
<h4 class="subsection"><span class="secnum">3.1.3</span><span class="sectitle">The Costs of Introducing Assignment</span></h4>

<p>As we have seen, the <code>set!</code> operation enables us to model objects that
have local state.  However, this advantage comes at a price.  Our programming
language can no longer be interpreted in terms of the substitution model of
procedure application that we introduced in <a href="1_002e1_002e5.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e5">1.1.5</a>.  Moreover, no
simple model with “nice” mathematical properties can be an adequate framework
for dealing with objects and assignment in programming languages.
</p>
<p>So long as we do not use assignments, two evaluations of the same procedure
with the same arguments will produce the same result, so that procedures can be
viewed as computing mathematical functions.  Programming without any use of
assignments, as we did throughout the first two chapters of this book, is
accordingly known as <a id="index-functional-programming"></a>
<em>functional programming</em>.
</p>
<p>To understand how assignment complicates matters, consider a simplified version
of the <code>make-withdraw</code> procedure of <a href="3_002e1_002e1.xhtml#g_t3_002e1_002e1">3.1.1</a> that does not
bother to check for an insufficient amount:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">make-simplified-withdraw balance</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">lambda</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">amount</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">set</span><span class="pun">!</span><span class="pln"> balance </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">-</span><span class="pln"> balance amount</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
    balance</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">

</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> W </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">make-simplified-withdraw </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">

</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">W </span><span class="lit">20</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="lit">5</span></i><span class="pln">

</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">W </span><span class="lit">10</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="lit">-5</span></i>
</pre></div>

<p>Compare this procedure with the following <code>make-decrementer</code> procedure,
which does not use <code>set!</code>:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">make-decrementer balance</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">lambda</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">amount</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">-</span><span class="pln"> balance amount</span><span class="clo">)))</span></pre></div>

<p><code>Make-decrementer</code> returns a procedure that subtracts its input from a
designated amount <code>balance</code>, but there is no accumulated effect over
successive calls, as with <code>make-simplified-withdraw</code>:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> D </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">make-decrementer </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">

</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">D </span><span class="lit">20</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="lit">5</span></i><span class="pln">

</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">D </span><span class="lit">10</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="lit">15</span></i>
</pre></div>

<p>We can use the substitution model to explain how <code>make-decrementer</code> works.
For instance, let us analyze the evaluation of the expression
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">((</span><span class="pln">make-decrementer </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">20</span><span class="clo">)</span></pre></div>

<p>We first simplify the operator of the combination by substituting 25 for
<code>balance</code> in the body of <code>make-decrementer</code>.  This reduces the
expression to
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">((</span><span class="kwd">lambda</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">amount</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">-</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="pln"> amount</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">20</span><span class="clo">)</span></pre></div>

<p>Now we apply the operator by substituting 20 for <code>amount</code> in the body of
the <code>lambda</code> expression:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">-</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">20</span><span class="clo">)</span></pre></div>

<p>The final answer is 5.
</p>
<p>Observe, however, what happens if we attempt a similar substitution analysis
with <code>make-simplified-withdraw</code>:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">((</span><span class="pln">make-simplified-withdraw </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">20</span><span class="clo">)</span></pre></div>

<p>We first simplify the operator by substituting 25 for <code>balance</code> in the
body of <code>make-simplified-withdraw</code>.  This reduces the expression
to<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF137" href="#FOOT137"><sup>137</sup></a>
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">((</span><span class="kwd">lambda</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">amount</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> 
   </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">set</span><span class="pun">!</span><span class="pln"> balance </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">-</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="pln"> amount</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">20</span><span class="clo">)</span></pre></div>

<p>Now we apply the operator by substituting 20 for <code>amount</code> in the body of
the <code>lambda</code> expression:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">set</span><span class="pun">!</span><span class="pln"> balance </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">-</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">20</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">25</span></pre></div>

<p>If we adhered to the substitution model, we would have to say that the meaning
of the procedure application is to first set <code>balance</code> to 5 and then
return 25 as the value of the expression.  This gets the wrong answer.  In
order to get the correct answer, we would have to somehow distinguish the first
occurrence of <code>balance</code> (before the effect of the <code>set!</code>)  from the
second occurrence of <code>balance</code> (after the effect of the <code>set!</code>), and
the substitution model cannot do this.
</p>
<p>The trouble here is that substitution is based ultimately on the notion that
the symbols in our language are essentially names for values.  But as soon as
we introduce <code>set!</code> and the idea that the value of a variable can change,
a variable can no longer be simply a name.  Now a variable somehow refers to a
place where a value can be stored, and the value stored at this place can
change.  In <a href="3_002e2.xhtml#g_t3_002e2">3.2</a> we will see how environments play this role of
“place” in our computational model.
</p>
<a id="Sameness-and-change"></a>
<h5 class="subsubheading">Sameness and change</h5>

<p>The issue surfacing here is more profound than the mere breakdown of a
particular model of computation.  As soon as we introduce change into our
computational models, many notions that were previously straightforward become
problematical.  Consider the concept of two things being “the same.”
</p>
<p>Suppose we call <code>make-decrementer</code> twice with the same argument to create
two procedures:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> D1 </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">make-decrementer </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> D2 </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">make-decrementer </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="clo">))</span></pre></div>

<p>Are <code>D1</code> and <code>D2</code> the same?  An acceptable answer is yes, because
<code>D1</code> and <code>D2</code> have the same computational behavior—each is a
procedure that subtracts its input from 25.  In fact, <code>D1</code> could be
substituted for <code>D2</code> in any computation without changing the result.
</p>
<p>Contrast this with making two calls to <code>make-simplified-withdraw</code>:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> W1 </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">make-simplified-withdraw </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> W2 </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">make-simplified-withdraw </span><span class="lit">25</span><span class="clo">))</span></pre></div>

<p>Are <code>W1</code> and <code>W2</code> the same?  Surely not, because calls to <code>W1</code>
and <code>W2</code> have distinct effects, as shown by the following sequence of
interactions:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">W1 </span><span class="lit">20</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="lit">5</span></i><span class="pln">

</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">W1 </span><span class="lit">20</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="lit">-15</span></i><span class="pln">

</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">W2 </span><span class="lit">20</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="lit">5</span></i>
</pre></div>

<p>Even though <code>W1</code> and <code>W2</code> are “equal” in the sense that they are
both created by evaluating the same expression, <code>(make-simplified-withdraw
25)</code>, it is not true that <code>W1</code> could be substituted for <code>W2</code> in any
expression without changing the result of evaluating the expression.
</p>
<p>A language that supports the concept that “equals can be substituted for
equals” in an expression without changing the value of the expression is said
to be <a id="index-referentially-transparent"></a>
<em>referentially transparent</em>.  Referential transparency is
violated when we include <code>set!</code> in our computer language.  This makes it
tricky to determine when we can simplify expressions by substituting equivalent
expressions.  Consequently, reasoning about programs that use assignment
becomes drastically more difficult.
</p>
<p>Once we forgo referential transparency, the notion of what it means for
computational objects to be “the same” becomes difficult to capture in a
formal way.  Indeed, the meaning of “same” in the real world that our
programs model is hardly clear in itself.  In general, we can determine that
two apparently identical objects are indeed “the same one” only by modifying
one object and then observing whether the other object has changed in the same
way.  But how can we tell if an object has “changed” other than by observing
the “same” object twice and seeing whether some property of the object
differs from one observation to the next?  Thus, we cannot determine “change”
without some <em>a priori</em> notion of “sameness,” and we cannot determine
sameness without observing the effects of change.
</p>
<p>As an example of how this issue arises in programming, consider the situation
where Peter and Paul have a bank account with $100 in it.  There is a
substantial difference between modeling this as
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> peter-acc </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">make-account </span><span class="lit">100</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> paul-acc </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">make-account </span><span class="lit">100</span><span class="clo">))</span></pre></div>

<p>and modeling it as
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> peter-acc </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">make-account </span><span class="lit">100</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> paul-acc peter-acc</span><span class="clo">)</span></pre></div>

<p>In the first situation, the two bank accounts are distinct.  Transactions made
by Peter will not affect Paul’s account, and vice versa.  In the second
situation, however, we have defined <code>paul-acc</code> to be <em>the same thing</em>
as <code>peter-acc</code>.  In effect, Peter and Paul now have a joint bank account,
and if Peter makes a withdrawal from <code>peter-acc</code> Paul will observe less
money in <code>paul-acc</code>.  These two similar but distinct situations can cause
confusion in building computational models.  With the shared account, in
particular, it can be especially confusing that there is one object (the bank
account) that has two different names (<code>peter-acc</code> and <code>paul-acc</code>);
if we are searching for all the places in our program where <code>paul-acc</code> can
be changed, we must remember to look also at things that change
<code>peter-acc</code>.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF138" href="#FOOT138"><sup>138</sup></a>
</p>
<p>With reference to the above remarks on “sameness” and “change,” observe
that if Peter and Paul could only examine their bank balances, and could not
perform operations that changed the balance, then the issue of whether the two
accounts are distinct would be moot.  In general, so long as we never modify
data objects, we can regard a compound data object to be precisely the totality
of its pieces.  For example, a rational number is determined by giving its
numerator and its denominator.  But this view is no longer valid in the
presence of change, where a compound data object has an “identity” that is
something different from the pieces of which it is composed.  A bank account is
still “the same” bank account even if we change the balance by making a
withdrawal; conversely, we could have two different bank accounts with the same
state information.  This complication is a consequence, not of our programming
language, but of our perception of a bank account as an object.  We do not, for
example, ordinarily regard a rational number as a changeable object with
identity, such that we could change the numerator and still have “the same”
rational number.
</p>
<a id="Pitfalls-of-imperative-programming"></a>
<h5 class="subsubheading">Pitfalls of imperative programming</h5>

<p>In contrast to functional programming, programming that makes extensive use of
assignment is known as <a id="index-imperative-programming"></a>
<em>imperative programming</em>.  In addition to
raising complications about computational models, programs written in
imperative style are susceptible to bugs that cannot occur in functional
programs.  For example, recall the iterative factorial program from 
<a href="1_002e2_002e1.xhtml#g_t1_002e2_002e1">1.2.1</a>:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">factorial n</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">iter product counter</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">if</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">&gt;</span><span class="pln"> counter n</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
        product
        </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">iter </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> counter product</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
              </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">+</span><span class="pln"> counter </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">))))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">iter </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">))</span></pre></div>

<p>Instead of passing arguments in the internal iterative loop, we could adopt a
more imperative style by using explicit assignment to update the values of the
variables <code>product</code> and <code>counter</code>:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">factorial n</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">let</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">((</span><span class="pln">product </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
        </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">counter </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">iter</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
      </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">if</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">&gt;</span><span class="pln"> counter n</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
          product
          </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">begin</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">set</span><span class="pun">!</span><span class="pln"> product </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> counter 
                                  product</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
                 </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">set</span><span class="pun">!</span><span class="pln"> counter </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">+</span><span class="pln"> counter </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
                 </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">iter</span><span class="clo">))))</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">iter</span><span class="clo">)))</span></pre></div>

<p>This does not change the results produced by the program, but it does introduce
a subtle trap.  How do we decide the order of the assignments?  As it happens,
the program is correct as written.  But writing the assignments in the opposite
order
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">set</span><span class="pun">!</span><span class="pln"> counter </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">+</span><span class="pln"> counter </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">set</span><span class="pun">!</span><span class="pln"> product </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> counter product</span><span class="clo">))</span></pre></div>

<p>would have produced a different, incorrect result.  In general, programming
with assignment forces us to carefully consider the relative orders of the
assignments to make sure that each statement is using the correct version of
the variables that have been changed.  This issue simply does not arise in
functional programs.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF139" href="#FOOT139"><sup>139</sup></a>
</p>
<p>The complexity of imperative programs becomes even worse if we consider
applications in which several processes execute concurrently.  We will return
to this in <a href="3_002e4.xhtml#g_t3_002e4">3.4</a>.  First, however, we will address the issue of
providing a computational model for expressions that involve assignment, and
explore the uses of objects with local state in designing simulations.
</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-3_002e7"></a>Exercise 3.7:</strong> Consider the bank account objects
created by <code>make-account</code>, with the password modification described in
<a href="3_002e1_002e1.xhtml#Exercise-3_002e3">Exercise 3.3</a>.  Suppose that our banking system requires the ability to
make joint accounts.  Define a procedure <code>make-joint</code> that accomplishes
this.  <code>Make-joint</code> should take three arguments.  The first is a
password-protected account.  The second argument must match the password with
which the account was defined in order for the <code>make-joint</code> operation to
proceed.  The third argument is a new password.  <code>Make-joint</code> is to create
an additional access to the original account using the new password.  For
example, if <code>peter-acc</code> is a bank account with password
<code>open-sesame</code>, then
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> paul-acc
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">make-joint peter-acc 
              </span><span class="lit">'open-sesame</span><span class="pln"> 
              </span><span class="lit">'rosebud</span><span class="clo">))</span></pre></div>

<p>will allow one to make transactions on <code>peter-acc</code> using the name
<code>paul-acc</code> and the password <code>rosebud</code>.  You may wish to modify your
solution to <a href="3_002e1_002e1.xhtml#Exercise-3_002e3">Exercise 3.3</a> to accommodate this new feature.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-3_002e8"></a>Exercise 3.8:</strong> When we defined the evaluation
model in <a href="1_002e1_002e3.xhtml#g_t1_002e1_002e3">1.1.3</a>, we said that the first step in evaluating an
expression is to evaluate its subexpressions.  But we never specified the order
in which the subexpressions should be evaluated (e.g., left to right or right
to left).  When we introduce assignment, the order in which the arguments to a
procedure are evaluated can make a difference to the result.  Define a simple
procedure <code>f</code> such that evaluating 
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">+</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">f </span><span class="lit">0</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">f </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">))</span></pre></div>

<p>will return 0 if
the arguments to <code>+</code> are evaluated from left to right but will return 1 if
the arguments are evaluated from right to left.
</p></blockquote>

<div class="footnote">
<hr />

<h4 class="footnotes-heading">Footnotes</h4>

<div id="FOOT137"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF137"><sup>137</sup></a>
We don’t substitute for the occurrence of <code>balance</code> in the
<code>set!</code> expression because the <code>⟨</code><var>name</var><code>⟩</code> in a <code>set!</code> is not
evaluated.  If we did substitute for it, we would get <code>(set! 25 (- 25
amount))</code>, which makes no sense.</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT138"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF138"><sup>138</sup></a>
The phenomenon of a single computational object
being accessed by more than one name is known as <a id="index-aliasing"></a>
<em>aliasing</em>.  The joint
bank account situation illustrates a very simple example of an alias.  In
<a href="3_002e3.xhtml#g_t3_002e3">3.3</a> we will see much more complex examples, such as “distinct”
compound data structures that share parts.  Bugs can occur in our programs if
we forget that a change to an object may also, as a “side effect,” change a
“different” object because the two “different” objects are actually a
single object appearing under different aliases.  These so-called
<a id="index-side_002deffect-bugs"></a>
<em>side-effect bugs</em> are so difficult to locate and to analyze that some
people have proposed that programming languages be designed in such a way as to
not allow side effects or aliasing (<a href="References.xhtml#Lampson-et-al_002e-1981">Lampson et al. 1981</a>; 
<a href="References.xhtml#Morris-et-al_002e-1980">Morris et al. 1980</a>).</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT139"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF139"><sup>139</sup></a>
In view of this, it is ironic that introductory
programming is most often taught in a highly imperative style.  This may be a
vestige of a belief, common throughout the 1960s and 1970s, that programs that
call procedures must inherently be less efficient than programs that perform
assignments.  (<a href="References.xhtml#Steele-1977">Steele 1977</a> debunks this argument.)  Alternatively it may
reflect a view that step-by-step assignment is easier for beginners to
visualize than procedure call.  Whatever the reason, it often saddles beginning
programmers with “should I set this variable before or after that one”
concerns that can complicate programming and obscure the important ideas.</p>
</div>
</div>
<hr />
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="3_002e2.xhtml#g_t3_002e2" accesskey="n" rel="next">3.2</a>, Previous: <a href="3_002e1_002e2.xhtml#g_t3_002e1_002e2" accesskey="p" rel="prev">3.1.2</a>, Up: <a href="3_002e1.xhtml#g_t3_002e1" accesskey="u" rel="prev">3.1</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>


</section>
</body>
</html>