<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 5.1, http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<title>Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 3.5</title>

<meta name="description" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 3.5" />
<meta name="keywords" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 3.5" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<link href="index.xhtml#Top" rel="start" title="Top" />
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" rel="index" title="Term Index" />
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents" />
<link href="Chapter-3.xhtml#Chapter-3" rel="prev" title="Chapter 3" />
<link href="3_002e5_002e1.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e1" rel="next" title="3.5.1" />
<link href="3_002e4_002e2.xhtml#g_t3_002e4_002e2" rel="prev" title="3.4.2" />

<link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="css/prettify.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<script src="js/jquery.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/footnotes.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/browsertest.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body>
<section><a id="g_t3_002e5"></a>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="3_002e5_002e1.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">3.5.1</a>, Previous: <a href="3_002e4_002e2.xhtml#g_t3_002e4_002e2" accesskey="p" rel="prev">3.4.2</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-3.xhtml#Chapter-3" accesskey="u" rel="prev">Chapter 3</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>
<hr />

<a id="Streams"></a>
<h3 class="section"><span class="secnum">3.5</span><span class="sectitle">Streams</span></h3>

<p>We’ve gained a good understanding of assignment as a tool in modeling, as well
as an appreciation of the complex problems that assignment raises. It is time
to ask whether we could have gone about things in a different way, so as to
avoid some of these problems.  In this section, we explore an alternative
approach to modeling state, based on data structures called <a id="index-streams-1"></a>
<em>streams</em>.
As we shall see, streams can mitigate some of the complexity of modeling state.
</p>
<p>Let’s step back and review where this complexity comes from.  In an attempt to
model real-world phenomena, we made some apparently reasonable decisions: We
modeled real-world objects with local state by computational objects with local
variables.  We identified time variation in the real world with time variation
in the computer.  We implemented the time variation of the states of the model
objects in the computer with assignments to the local variables of the model
objects.
</p>
<p>Is there another approach?  Can we avoid identifying time in the computer with
time in the modeled world?  Must we make the model change with time in order to
model phenomena in a changing world?  Think about the issue in terms of
mathematical functions.  We can describe the time-varying behavior of a
quantity <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mi>x</mi>
</math> as a function of time <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mrow class="MJX-TeXAtom-ORD">
    <mi>x</mi>
    <mo stretchy="false">(</mo>
    <mi>t</mi>
    <mo stretchy="false">)</mo>
  </mrow>
</math>.  If we concentrate on <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mi>x</mi>
</math>
instant by instant, we think of it as a changing quantity.  Yet if we
concentrate on the entire time history of values, we do not emphasize
change—the function itself does not change.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF180" href="#FOOT180"><sup>180</sup></a>
</p>
<p>If time is measured in discrete steps, then we can model a time function as a
(possibly infinite) sequence.  In this section, we will see how to model change
in terms of sequences that represent the time histories of the systems being
modeled.  To accomplish this, we introduce new data structures called
<a id="index-streams-2"></a>
<em>streams</em>.  From an abstract point of view, a stream is simply a
sequence.  However, we will find that the straightforward implementation of
streams as lists (as in <a href="2_002e2_002e1.xhtml#g_t2_002e2_002e1">2.2.1</a>) doesn’t fully reveal the power of
stream processing.  As an alternative, we introduce the technique of
<a id="index-delayed-evaluation-1"></a>
<em>delayed evaluation</em>, which enables us to represent very large (even
infinite) sequences as streams.
</p>
<p>Stream processing lets us model systems that have state without ever using
assignment or mutable data.  This has important implications, both theoretical
and practical, because we can build models that avoid the drawbacks inherent in
introducing assignment.  On the other hand, the stream framework raises
difficulties of its own, and the question of which modeling technique leads to
more modular and more easily maintained systems remains open.
</p>
<table class="menu" style="border-collapse: collapse; border-spacing: 0">
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="3_002e5_002e1.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e1" accesskey="1">3.5.1</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Streams Are Delayed Lists
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="3_002e5_002e2.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e2" accesskey="2">3.5.2</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Infinite Streams
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="3_002e5_002e3.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e3" accesskey="3">3.5.3</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Exploiting the Stream Paradigm
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="3_002e5_002e4.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e4" accesskey="4">3.5.4</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Streams and Delayed Evaluation
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="3_002e5_002e5.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e5" accesskey="5">3.5.5</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Modularity of Functional Programs and Modularity of
                     Objects
</td></tr>
</table>

<div class="footnote">
<hr />

<h4 class="footnotes-heading">Footnotes</h4>

<div id="FOOT180"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF180"><sup>180</sup></a>
Physicists sometimes
adopt this view by introducing the “world lines” of particles as a device for
reasoning about motion.  We’ve also already mentioned (<a href="2_002e2_002e3.xhtml#g_t2_002e2_002e3">2.2.3</a>)
that this is the natural way to think about signal-processing systems.  We will
explore applications of streams to signal processing in <a href="3_002e5_002e3.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e3">3.5.3</a>.</p>
</div>
</div>
<hr />
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="3_002e5_002e1.xhtml#g_t3_002e5_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">3.5.1</a>, Previous: <a href="3_002e4_002e2.xhtml#g_t3_002e4_002e2" accesskey="p" rel="prev">3.4.2</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-3.xhtml#Chapter-3" accesskey="u" rel="prev">Chapter 3</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>


</section>
</body>
</html>