<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 5.1, http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<title>Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 4.4</title>

<meta name="description" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 4.4" />
<meta name="keywords" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 4.4" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<link href="index.xhtml#Top" rel="start" title="Top" />
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" rel="index" title="Term Index" />
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents" />
<link href="Chapter-4.xhtml#Chapter-4" rel="prev" title="Chapter 4" />
<link href="4_002e4_002e1.xhtml#g_t4_002e4_002e1" rel="next" title="4.4.1" />
<link href="4_002e3_002e3.xhtml#g_t4_002e3_002e3" rel="prev" title="4.3.3" />

<link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="css/prettify.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<script src="js/jquery.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/footnotes.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/browsertest.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body>
<section><a id="g_t4_002e4"></a>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="4_002e4_002e1.xhtml#g_t4_002e4_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">4.4.1</a>, Previous: <a href="4_002e3_002e3.xhtml#g_t4_002e3_002e3" accesskey="p" rel="prev">4.3.3</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-4.xhtml#Chapter-4" accesskey="u" rel="prev">Chapter 4</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>
<hr />

<a id="Logic-Programming"></a>
<h3 class="section"><span class="secnum">4.4</span><span class="sectitle">Logic Programming</span></h3>

<p>In <a href="Chapter-1.xhtml#Chapter-1">Chapter 1</a> we stressed that computer science deals with imperative (how
to) knowledge, whereas mathematics deals with declarative (what is) knowledge.
Indeed, programming languages require that the programmer express knowledge in
a form that indicates the step-by-step methods for solving particular problems.
On the other hand, high-level languages provide, as part of the language
implementation, a substantial amount of methodological knowledge that frees the
user from concern with numerous details of how a specified computation will
progress.
</p>
<p>Most programming languages, including Lisp, are organized around computing the
values of mathematical functions.  Expression-oriented languages (such as Lisp,
Fortran, and Algol) capitalize on the “pun” that an expression that describes
the value of a function may also be interpreted as a means of computing that
value.  Because of this, most programming languages are strongly biased toward
unidirectional computations (computations with well-defined inputs and
outputs).  There are, however, radically different programming languages that
relax this bias.  We saw one such example in <a href="3_002e3_002e5.xhtml#g_t3_002e3_002e5">3.3.5</a>, where the
objects of computation were arithmetic constraints.  In a constraint system the
direction and the order of computation are not so well specified; in carrying
out a computation the system must therefore provide more detailed “how to”
knowledge than would be the case with an ordinary arithmetic computation.  This
does not mean, however, that the user is released altogether from the
responsibility of providing imperative knowledge.  There are many constraint
networks that implement the same set of constraints, and the user must choose
from the set of mathematically equivalent networks a suitable network to
specify a particular computation.
</p>
<p>The nondeterministic program evaluator of <a href="4_002e3.xhtml#g_t4_002e3">4.3</a> also moves away
from the view that programming is about constructing algorithms for computing
unidirectional functions.  In a nondeterministic language, expressions can have
more than one value, and, as a result, the computation is dealing with
relations rather than with single-valued functions.  Logic programming extends
this idea by combining a relational vision of programming with a powerful kind
of symbolic pattern matching called <a id="index-unification"></a>
<em>unification</em>.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF262" href="#FOOT262"><sup>262</sup></a>
</p>
<p>This approach, when it works, can be a very powerful way to write programs.
Part of the power comes from the fact that a single “what is” fact can be
used to solve a number of different problems that would have different “how
to” components.  As an example, consider the <code>append</code> operation, which
takes two lists as arguments and combines their elements to form a single list.
In a procedural language such as Lisp, we could define <code>append</code> in terms
of the basic list constructor <code>cons</code>, as we did in <a href="2_002e2_002e1.xhtml#g_t2_002e2_002e1">2.2.1</a>:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">append x y</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">if</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">null? x</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> 
      y 
      </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">cons</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">car</span><span class="pln"> x</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">append </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">cdr</span><span class="pln"> x</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> y</span><span class="clo">))))</span></pre></div>

<p>This procedure can be regarded as a translation into Lisp of the following two
rules, the first of which covers the case where the first list is empty and the
second of which handles the case of a nonempty list, which is a <code>cons</code> of
two parts:
</p>
<ul>
<li> For any list <code>y</code>, the empty list and <code>y</code> <code>append</code> to form
<code>y</code>.

</li><li> For any <code>u</code>, <code>v</code>, <code>y</code>, and <code>z</code>, <code>(cons u v)</code> and
<code>y</code> <code>append</code> to form <code>(cons u z)</code> if <code>v</code> and <code>y</code>
<code>append</code> to form <code>z</code>.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF263" href="#FOOT263"><sup>263</sup></a>

</li></ul>

<p>Using the <code>append</code> procedure, we can answer questions such as
</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Find the <code>append</code> of <code>(a b)</code> and <code>(c d)</code>.
</p></blockquote>

<p>But the same two rules are also sufficient for answering the following sorts of
questions, which the procedure can’t answer:
</p>
<blockquote>
<p>Find a list <code>y</code> that <code>append</code>s with <code>(a b)</code> to produce <code>(a
b c d)</code>.
</p>
<p>Find all <code>x</code> and <code>y</code> that <code>append</code> to form <code>(a b c d)</code>.
</p></blockquote>

<p>In a logic programming language, the programmer writes an <code>append</code>
“procedure” by stating the two rules about <code>append</code> given above.  “How
to” knowledge is provided automatically by the interpreter to allow this
single pair of rules to be used to answer all three types of questions about
<code>append</code>.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF264" href="#FOOT264"><sup>264</sup></a>
</p>
<p>Contemporary logic programming languages (including the one we implement here)
have substantial deficiencies, in that their general “how to” methods can
lead them into spurious infinite loops or other undesirable behavior.  Logic
programming is an active field of research in computer
science.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF265" href="#FOOT265"><sup>265</sup></a>
</p>
<p>Earlier in this chapter we explored the technology of implementing interpreters
and described the elements that are essential to an interpreter for a Lisp-like
language (indeed, to an interpreter for any conventional language).  Now we
will apply these ideas to discuss an interpreter for a logic programming
language.  We call this language the <a id="index-query-language"></a>
<em>query language</em>, because it is
very useful for retrieving information from data bases by formulating
<a id="index-queries"></a>
<em>queries</em>, or questions, expressed in the language.  Even though the
query language is very different from Lisp, we will find it convenient to
describe the language in terms of the same general framework we have been using
all along: as a collection of primitive elements, together with means of
combination that enable us to combine simple elements to create more complex
elements and means of abstraction that enable us to regard complex elements as
single conceptual units.  An interpreter for a logic programming language is
considerably more complex than an interpreter for a language like Lisp.
Nevertheless, we will see that our query-language interpreter contains many of
the same elements found in the interpreter of <a href="4_002e1.xhtml#g_t4_002e1">4.1</a>.  In
particular, there will be an “eval” part that classifies expressions
according to type and an “apply” part that implements the language’s
abstraction mechanism (procedures in the case of Lisp, and <a id="index-rules"></a>
<em>rules</em> in
the case of logic programming).  Also, a central role is played in the
implementation by a frame data structure, which determines the correspondence
between symbols and their associated values.  One additional interesting aspect
of our query-language implementation is that we make substantial use of
streams, which were introduced in <a href="Chapter-3.xhtml#Chapter-3">Chapter 3</a>.
</p>
<table class="menu" style="border-collapse: collapse; border-spacing: 0">
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="4_002e4_002e1.xhtml#g_t4_002e4_002e1" accesskey="1">4.4.1</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Deductive Information Retrieval
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="4_002e4_002e2.xhtml#g_t4_002e4_002e2" accesskey="2">4.4.2</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">How the Query System Works
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="4_002e4_002e3.xhtml#g_t4_002e4_002e3" accesskey="3">4.4.3</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Is Logic Programming Mathematical Logic?
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="4_002e4_002e4.xhtml#g_t4_002e4_002e4" accesskey="4">4.4.4</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Implementing the Query System
</td></tr>
</table>

<div class="footnote">
<hr />

<h4 class="footnotes-heading">Footnotes</h4>

<div id="FOOT262"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF262"><sup>262</sup></a>
Logic
programming has grown out of a long history of research in automatic theorem
proving.  Early theorem-proving programs could accomplish very little, because
they exhaustively searched the space of possible proofs.  The major
breakthrough that made such a search plausible was the discovery in the early
1960s of the <a id="index-unification-algorithm"></a>
<em>unification algorithm</em> and the <a id="index-resolution-principle"></a>
<em>resolution principle</em> 
(<a href="References.xhtml#Robinson-1965">Robinson 1965</a>).  Resolution was used, for example, by 
<a href="References.xhtml#Green-and-Raphael-_00281968_0029">Green and Raphael (1968)</a> (see also <a href="References.xhtml#Green-1969">Green 1969</a>) as the basis for a deductive
question-answering system.  During most of this period, researchers
concentrated on algorithms that are guaranteed to find a proof if one exists.
Such algorithms were difficult to control and to direct toward a proof.  
<a href="References.xhtml#Hewitt-_00281969_0029">Hewitt (1969)</a> recognized the possibility of merging the control structure of a
programming language with the operations of a logic-manipulation system,
leading to the work in automatic search mentioned in <a href="4_002e3_002e1.xhtml#g_t4_002e3_002e1">4.3.1</a>
(<a href="4_002e3_002e1.xhtml#Footnote-250">Footnote 250</a>).  At the same time that this was being done,
Colmerauer, in Marseille, was developing rule-based systems for manipulating
natural language (see <a href="References.xhtml#Colmerauer-et-al_002e-1973">Colmerauer et al. 1973</a>).  He invented a programming
language called Prolog for representing those rules.  <a href="References.xhtml#Kowalski-_00281973_003b-1979_0029">Kowalski (1973; 1979)</a>, in
Edinburgh, recognized that execution of a Prolog program could be interpreted
as proving theorems (using a proof technique called linear Horn-clause
resolution).  The merging of the last two strands led to the logic-programming
movement.  Thus, in assigning credit for the development of logic programming,
the French can point to Prolog’s genesis at the University of Marseille, while
the British can highlight the work at the University of Edinburgh.  According
to people at <abbr>MIT</abbr>, logic programming was developed by these groups in
an attempt to figure out what Hewitt was talking about in his brilliant but
impenetrable Ph.D. thesis.  For a history of logic programming, see 
<a href="References.xhtml#Robinson-1983">Robinson 1983</a>.</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT263"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF263"><sup>263</sup></a>
To see the correspondence between the
rules and the procedure, let <code>x</code> in the procedure (where <code>x</code> is
nonempty) correspond to <code>(cons u v)</code> in the rule.  Then <code>z</code> in the
rule corresponds to the <code>append</code> of <code>(cdr x)</code> and <code>y</code>.</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT264"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF264"><sup>264</sup></a>
This certainly does not relieve the user of the entire
problem of how to compute the answer.  There are many different mathematically
equivalent sets of rules for formulating the <code>append</code> relation, only some
of which can be turned into effective devices for computing in any direction.
In addition, sometimes “what is” information gives no clue “how to” compute
an answer.  For example, consider the problem of computing the <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mi>y</mi>
</math> such that
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mrow class="MJX-TeXAtom-ORD">
    <msup>
      <mi>y</mi>
      <mn>2</mn>
    </msup>
    <mo>=</mo>
    <mi>x</mi>
  </mrow>
</math>.</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT265"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF265"><sup>265</sup></a>
Interest in logic programming peaked during the early 80s
when the Japanese government began an ambitious project aimed at building
superfast computers optimized to run logic programming languages.  The speed of
such computers was to be measured in LIPS (Logical Inferences Per Second)
rather than the usual FLOPS (FLoating-point Operations Per Second).  Although
the project succeeded in developing hardware and software as originally
planned, the international computer industry moved in a different direction.
See <a href="References.xhtml#Feigenbaum-and-Shrobe-1993">Feigenbaum and Shrobe 1993</a> for an overview evaluation of the Japanese
project.  The logic programming community has also moved on to consider
relational programming based on techniques other than simple pattern matching,
such as the ability to deal with numerical constraints such as the ones
illustrated in the constraint-propagation system of <a href="3_002e3_002e5.xhtml#g_t3_002e3_002e5">3.3.5</a>.</p>
</div>
</div>
<hr />
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="4_002e4_002e1.xhtml#g_t4_002e4_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">4.4.1</a>, Previous: <a href="4_002e3_002e3.xhtml#g_t4_002e3_002e3" accesskey="p" rel="prev">4.3.3</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-4.xhtml#Chapter-4" accesskey="u" rel="prev">Chapter 4</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>


</section>
</body>
</html>