<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 5.1, http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<title>Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 5.5.7</title>

<meta name="description" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 5.5.7" />
<meta name="keywords" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 5.5.7" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<link href="index.xhtml#Top" rel="start" title="Top" />
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" rel="index" title="Term Index" />
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents" />
<link href="5_002e5.xhtml#g_t5_002e5" rel="prev" title="5.5" />
<link href="References.xhtml#References" rel="next" title="References" />
<link href="5_002e5_002e6.xhtml#g_t5_002e5_002e6" rel="prev" title="5.5.6" />

<link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="css/prettify.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<script src="js/jquery.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/footnotes.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/browsertest.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body>
<section><a id="g_t5_002e5_002e7"></a>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="References.xhtml#References" accesskey="n" rel="next">References</a>, Previous: <a href="5_002e5_002e6.xhtml#g_t5_002e5_002e6" accesskey="p" rel="prev">5.5.6</a>, Up: <a href="5_002e5.xhtml#g_t5_002e5" accesskey="u" rel="prev">5.5</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>
<hr />

<a id="Interfacing-Compiled-Code-to-the-Evaluator"></a>
<h4 class="subsection"><span class="secnum">5.5.7</span><span class="sectitle">Interfacing Compiled Code to the Evaluator</span></h4>

<p>We have not yet explained how to load compiled code into the evaluator machine
or how to run it.  We will assume that the explicit-control-evaluator machine
has been defined as in <a href="5_002e4_002e4.xhtml#g_t5_002e4_002e4">5.4.4</a>, with the additional operations
specified in <a href="5_002e5_002e2.xhtml#Footnote-323">Footnote 323</a>.  We will implement a procedure
<code>compile-and-go</code> that compiles a Scheme expression, loads the resulting
object code into the evaluator machine, and causes the machine to run the code
in the evaluator global environment, print the result, and enter the
evaluator’s driver loop.  We will also modify the evaluator so that interpreted
expressions can call compiled procedures as well as interpreted ones.  We can
then put a compiled procedure into the machine and use the evaluator to call
it:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">compile-and-go
 </span><span class="lit">'</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">factorial n</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">if</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">=</span><span class="pln"> n </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
        </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="pln">
        </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">factorial </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">-</span><span class="pln"> n </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln"> n</span><span class="clo">))))</span><span class="pln">

</span><i><span class="com">;;; EC-Eval value:</span></i><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="pln">ok</span></i><span class="pln">

</span><i><span class="com">;;; EC-Eval input:</span></i><span class="pln">
</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">factorial </span><span class="lit">5</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">

</span><i><span class="com">;;; EC-Eval value:</span></i><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="lit">120</span></i>
</pre></div>

<p>To allow the evaluator to handle compiled procedures (for example, to evaluate
the call to <code>factorial</code> above), we need to change the code at
<code>apply-dispatch</code> (<a href="5_002e4_002e1.xhtml#g_t5_002e4_002e1">5.4.1</a>) so that it recognizes compiled
procedures (as distinct from compound or primitive procedures) and transfers
control directly to the entry point of the compiled code:<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF333" href="#FOOT333"><sup>333</sup></a>
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="pln">apply-dispatch
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">test </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">op primitive-procedure?</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">reg proc</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">branch </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">label primitive-apply</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">test </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">op compound-procedure?</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">reg proc</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">branch </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">label compound-apply</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">test </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">op compiled-procedure?</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">reg proc</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">branch </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">label compiled-apply</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">goto </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">label unknown-procedure-type</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">

compiled-apply
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">restore continue</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">assign val
          </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">op compiled-procedure-entry</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
          </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">reg proc</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">goto </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">reg val</span><span class="clo">))</span></pre></div>

<p>Note the restore of <code>continue</code> at <code>compiled-apply</code>.  Recall that the
evaluator was arranged so that at <code>apply-dispatch</code>, the continuation would
be at the top of the stack.  The compiled code entry point, on the other hand,
expects the continuation to be in <code>continue</code>, so <code>continue</code> must be
restored before the compiled code is executed.
</p>
<p>To enable us to run some compiled code when we start the evaluator machine, we
add a <code>branch</code> instruction at the beginning of the evaluator machine,
which causes the machine to go to a new entry point if the <code>flag</code> register
is set.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF334" href="#FOOT334"><sup>334</sup></a>
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="roman"><span class="com">;; branches if </span><code><span class="com">flag</span></code><span class="com"> is set:</span></span><span class="pln">
</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">branch </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">label external-entry</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln"> 
read-eval-print-loop
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">perform </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">op initialize-stack</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="roman"><span class="pun">…</span></span>
</pre></div>

<p><code>External-entry</code> assumes that the machine is started with <code>val</code>
containing the location of an instruction sequence that puts a result into
<code>val</code> and ends with <code>(goto (reg continue))</code>.  Starting at this entry
point jumps to the location designated by <code>val</code>, but first assigns
<code>continue</code> so that execution will return to <code>print-result</code>, which
prints the value in <code>val</code> and then goes to the beginning of the
evaluator’s read-eval-print loop.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF335" href="#FOOT335"><sup>335</sup></a>
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="pln">external-entry
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">perform </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">op initialize-stack</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">assign env </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">op get-global-environment</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">assign continue </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">label print-result</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">goto </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">reg val</span><span class="clo">))</span></pre></div>

<p>Now we can use the following procedure to compile a procedure definition,
execute the compiled code, and run the read-eval-print loop so we can try the
procedure.  Because we want the compiled code to return to the location in
<code>continue</code> with its result in <code>val</code>, we compile the expression with a
target of <code>val</code> and a linkage of <code>return</code>.  In order to transform the
object code produced by the compiler into executable instructions for the
evaluator register machine, we use the procedure <code>assemble</code> from the
register-machine simulator (<a href="5_002e2_002e2.xhtml#g_t5_002e2_002e2">5.2.2</a>).  We then initialize the
<code>val</code> register to point to the list of instructions, set the <code>flag</code>
so that the evaluator will go to <code>external-entry</code>, and start the
evaluator.
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">compile-and-go expression</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">let</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">((</span><span class="pln">instructions
         </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">assemble 
          </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">statements
           </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">compile 
            expression </span><span class="lit">'val</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">'return</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
          eceval</span><span class="clo">)))</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">set</span><span class="pun">!</span><span class="pln"> the-global-environment
          </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">setup-environment</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">set-register-contents! 
     eceval </span><span class="lit">'val</span><span class="pln"> instructions</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">set-register-contents! 
     eceval </span><span class="lit">'flag</span><span class="pln"> true</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">start eceval</span><span class="clo">)))</span></pre></div>

<p>If we have set up stack monitoring, as at the end of <a href="5_002e4_002e4.xhtml#g_t5_002e4_002e4">5.4.4</a>, we
can examine the stack usage of compiled code:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">compile-and-go
 </span><span class="lit">'</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">factorial n</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">if</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">=</span><span class="pln"> n </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
        </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="pln">
        </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">factorial </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">-</span><span class="pln"> n </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln"> n</span><span class="clo">))))</span><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">total-pushes </span><span class="pun">=</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">0</span><span class="pun">,</span><span class="pln"> maximum-depth </span><span class="pun">=</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">0</span><span class="clo">)</span></i><span class="pln">

</span><i><span class="com">;;; EC-Eval value:</span></i><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="pln">ok</span></i><span class="pln">

</span><i><span class="com">;;; EC-Eval input:</span></i><span class="pln">
</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">factorial </span><span class="lit">5</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">total-pushes </span><span class="pun">=</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">31</span><span class="pun">,</span><span class="pln"> maximum-depth </span><span class="pun">=</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">14</span><span class="clo">)</span></i><span class="pln">

</span><i><span class="com">;;; EC-Eval value:</span></i><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="lit">120</span></i>
</pre></div>

<p>Compare this example with the evaluation of <code>(factorial 5)</code> using the
interpreted version of the same procedure, shown at the end of 
<a href="5_002e4_002e4.xhtml#g_t5_002e4_002e4">5.4.4</a>.  The interpreted version required 144 pushes and a maximum stack
depth of 28.  This illustrates the optimization that results from our
compilation strategy.
</p>
<a id="Interpretation-and-compilation"></a>
<h5 class="subsubheading">Interpretation and compilation</h5>

<p>With the programs in this section, we can now experiment with the alternative
execution strategies of interpretation and compilation.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF336" href="#FOOT336"><sup>336</sup></a>  An interpreter raises the machine to
the level of the user program; a compiler lowers the user program to the level
of the machine language.  We can regard the Scheme language (or any programming
language) as a coherent family of abstractions erected on the machine language.
Interpreters are good for interactive program development and debugging because
the steps of program execution are organized in terms of these abstractions,
and are therefore more intelligible to the programmer.  Compiled code can
execute faster, because the steps of program execution are organized in terms
of the machine language, and the compiler is free to make optimizations that
cut across the higher-level abstractions.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF337" href="#FOOT337"><sup>337</sup></a>
</p>
<p>The alternatives of interpretation and compilation also lead to different
strategies for porting languages to new computers. Suppose that we wish to
implement Lisp for a new machine.  One strategy is to begin with the
explicit-control evaluator of <a href="5_002e4.xhtml#g_t5_002e4">5.4</a> and translate its instructions
to instructions for the new machine.  A different strategy is to begin with the
compiler and change the code generators so that they generate code for the new
machine.  The second strategy allows us to run any Lisp program on the new
machine by first compiling it with the compiler running on our original Lisp
system, and linking it with a compiled version of the run-time
library.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF338" href="#FOOT338"><sup>338</sup></a> Better yet, we can
compile the compiler itself, and run this on the new machine to compile other
Lisp programs.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF339" href="#FOOT339"><sup>339</sup></a>  Or we can compile one of the interpreters of 
<a href="4_002e1.xhtml#g_t4_002e1">4.1</a> to produce an interpreter that runs on the new machine.
</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e45"></a>Exercise 5.45:</strong> By comparing the stack operations
used by compiled code to the stack operations used by the evaluator for the
same computation, we can determine the extent to which the compiler optimizes
use of the stack, both in speed (reducing the total number of stack operations)
and in space (reducing the maximum stack depth).  Comparing this optimized
stack use to the performance of a special-purpose machine for the same
computation gives some indication of the quality of the compiler.
</p>
<ol>
<li> <a href="5_002e4_002e4.xhtml#Exercise-5_002e27">Exercise 5.27</a> asked you to determine, as a function of <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mi>n</mi>
</math>, the number
of pushes and the maximum stack depth needed by the evaluator to compute <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mrow class="MJX-TeXAtom-ORD">
    <mi>n</mi>
    <mo>!</mo>
  </mrow>
</math>
using the recursive factorial procedure given above.  <a href="5_002e2_002e4.xhtml#Exercise-5_002e14">Exercise 5.14</a> asked
you to do the same measurements for the special-purpose factorial machine shown
in <a href="5_002e1_002e4.xhtml#Figure-5_002e11">Figure 5.11</a>. Now perform the same analysis using the compiled
<code>factorial</code> procedure.

<p>Take the ratio of the number of pushes in the compiled version to the number of
pushes in the interpreted version, and do the same for the maximum stack depth.
Since the number of operations and the stack depth used to compute <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mrow class="MJX-TeXAtom-ORD">
    <mi>n</mi>
    <mo>!</mo>
  </mrow>
</math>  are
linear in <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mi>n</mi>
</math>, these ratios should approach constants as <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mi>n</mi>
</math> becomes large.
What are these constants?  Similarly, find the ratios of the stack usage in the
special-purpose machine to the usage in the interpreted version.
</p>
<p>Compare the ratios for special-purpose versus interpreted code to the ratios
for compiled versus interpreted code.  You should find that the special-purpose
machine does much better than the compiled code, since the hand-tailored
controller code should be much better than what is produced by our rudimentary
general-purpose compiler.
</p>
</li><li> Can you suggest improvements to the compiler that would help it generate code
that would come closer in performance to the hand-tailored version?

</li></ol>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e46"></a>Exercise 5.46:</strong> Carry out an analysis like the
one in <a href="#Exercise-5_002e45">Exercise 5.45</a> to determine the effectiveness of compiling the
tree-recursive Fibonacci procedure
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">fib n</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">if</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">&lt;</span><span class="pln"> n </span><span class="lit">2</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
      n
      </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">+</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">fib </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">-</span><span class="pln"> n </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">fib </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">-</span><span class="pln"> n </span><span class="lit">2</span><span class="clo">)))))</span></pre></div>

<p>compared to the effectiveness of using the special-purpose Fibonacci machine of
<a href="5_002e1_002e4.xhtml#Figure-5_002e12">Figure 5.12</a>.  (For measurement of the interpreted performance, see
<a href="5_002e4_002e4.xhtml#Exercise-5_002e29">Exercise 5.29</a>.)  For Fibonacci, the time resource used is not linear in
<math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mrow class="MJX-TeXAtom-ORD">
    <mi>n</mi>
    <mo>;</mo>
  </mrow>
</math> hence the ratios of stack operations will not approach a limiting value
that is independent of <math xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML">
  <mi>n</mi>
</math>.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e47"></a>Exercise 5.47:</strong> This section described how to
modify the explicit-control evaluator so that interpreted code can call
compiled procedures.  Show how to modify the compiler so that compiled
procedures can call not only primitive procedures and compiled procedures, but
interpreted procedures as well.  This requires modifying
<code>compile-procedure-call</code> to handle the case of compound (interpreted)
procedures.  Be sure to handle all the same <code>target</code> and <code>linkage</code>
combinations as in <code>compile-proc-appl</code>.  To do the actual procedure
application, the code needs to jump to the evaluator’s <code>compound-apply</code>
entry point.  This label cannot be directly referenced in object code (since
the assembler requires that all labels referenced by the code it is assembling
be defined there), so we will add a register called <code>compapp</code> to the
evaluator machine to hold this entry point, and add an instruction to
initialize it:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="pln">  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">assign compapp </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">label compound-apply</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="roman"><span class="com">;; branches if </span><code><span class="com">flag</span></code><span class="com"> is set:</span></span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">branch </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">label external-entry</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
read-eval-print-loop </span><span class="roman"><span class="pun">…</span></span>
</pre></div>

<p>To test your code, start by defining a procedure <code>f</code> that calls a
procedure <code>g</code>.  Use <code>compile-and-go</code> to compile the definition of
<code>f</code> and start the evaluator.  Now, typing at the evaluator, define
<code>g</code> and try to call <code>f</code>.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e48"></a>Exercise 5.48:</strong> The <code>compile-and-go</code>
interface implemented in this section is awkward, since the compiler can be
called only once (when the evaluator machine is started).  Augment the
compiler-interpreter interface by providing a <code>compile-and-run</code> primitive
that can be called from within the explicit-control evaluator as follows:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><i><span class="com">;;; EC-Eval input:</span></i><span class="pln">
</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">compile-and-run
 </span><span class="lit">'</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">factorial n</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">if</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">=</span><span class="pln"> n </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
        </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="pln">
        </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">factorial </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">-</span><span class="pln"> n </span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln"> n</span><span class="clo">))))</span><span class="pln">

</span><i><span class="com">;;; EC-Eval value:</span></i><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="pln">ok</span></i><span class="pln">

</span><i><span class="com">;;; EC-Eval input:</span></i><span class="pln">
</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">factorial </span><span class="lit">5</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">

</span><i><span class="com">;;; EC-Eval value:</span></i><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="lit">120</span></i>
</pre></div>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e49"></a>Exercise 5.49:</strong> As an alternative to using the
explicit-control evaluator’s read-eval-print loop, design a register machine
that performs a read-compile-execute-print loop.  That is, the machine should
run a loop that reads an expression, compiles it, assembles and executes the
resulting code, and prints the result.  This is easy to run in our simulated
setup, since we can arrange to call the procedures <code>compile</code> and
<code>assemble</code> as “register-machine operations.”
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e50"></a>Exercise 5.50:</strong> Use the compiler to compile the
metacircular evaluator of <a href="4_002e1.xhtml#g_t4_002e1">4.1</a> and run this program using the
register-machine simulator.  (To compile more than one definition at a time,
you can package the definitions in a <code>begin</code>.)  The resulting interpreter
will run very slowly because of the multiple levels of interpretation, but
getting all the details to work is an instructive exercise.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e51"></a>Exercise 5.51:</strong> Develop a rudimentary
implementation of Scheme in C (or some other low-level language of your choice)
by translating the explicit-control evaluator of <a href="5_002e4.xhtml#g_t5_002e4">5.4</a> into C.  In
order to run this code you will need to also provide appropriate
storage-allocation routines and other run-time support.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e52"></a>Exercise 5.52:</strong> As a counterpoint to 
<a href="#Exercise-5_002e51">Exercise 5.51</a>, modify the compiler so that it compiles Scheme procedures
into sequences of C instructions.  Compile the metacircular evaluator of
<a href="4_002e1.xhtml#g_t4_002e1">4.1</a> to produce a Scheme interpreter written in C.
</p></blockquote>

<div class="footnote">
<hr />

<h4 class="footnotes-heading">Footnotes</h4>

<div id="FOOT333"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF333"><sup>333</sup></a>
Of course,
compiled procedures as well as interpreted procedures are compound
(nonprimitive).  For compatibility with the terminology used in the
explicit-control evaluator, in this section we will use “compound” to mean
interpreted (as opposed to compiled).</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT334"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF334"><sup>334</sup></a>
Now that the evaluator machine starts with a <code>branch</code>, we
must always initialize the <code>flag</code> register before starting the evaluator
machine.  To start the machine at its ordinary read-eval-print loop, we could
use
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">start-eceval</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">set</span><span class="pun">!</span><span class="pln"> the-global-environment
        </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">setup-environment</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">set-register-contents! eceval </span><span class="lit">'flag</span><span class="pln"> false</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">start eceval</span><span class="clo">))</span></pre></div>
</div>
<div id="FOOT335"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF335"><sup>335</sup></a>
Since a compiled procedure is an
object that the system may try to print, we also modify the system print
operation <code>user-print</code> (from <a href="4_002e1_002e4.xhtml#g_t4_002e1_002e4">4.1.4</a>) so that it will not
attempt to print the components of a compiled procedure:
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">define</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">user-print object</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">cond</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">((</span><span class="pln">compound-procedure? object</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
         </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">display 
          </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">list </span><span class="lit">'compound-procedure</span><span class="pln">
                </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">procedure-parameters object</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
                </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">procedure-body object</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
                </span><span class="lit">'</span><span class="pun">&lt;</span><span class="pln">procedure-env</span><span class="pun">&gt;</span><span class="clo">)))</span><span class="pln">
        </span><span class="opn">((</span><span class="pln">compiled-procedure? object</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
         </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">display </span><span class="lit">'</span><span class="pun">&lt;</span><span class="pln">compiled-procedure</span><span class="pun">&gt;</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
        </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">else</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">display object</span><span class="clo">))))</span></pre></div>
</div>
<div id="FOOT336"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF336"><sup>336</sup></a>
We can do even
better by extending the compiler to allow compiled code to call interpreted
procedures.  See <a href="#Exercise-5_002e47">Exercise 5.47</a>.</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT337"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF337"><sup>337</sup></a>
Independent of the strategy
of execution, we incur significant overhead if we insist that errors
encountered in execution of a user program be detected and signaled, rather
than being allowed to kill the system or produce wrong answers.  For example,
an out-of-bounds array reference can be detected by checking the validity of
the reference before performing it.  The overhead of checking, however, can be
many times the cost of the array reference itself, and a programmer should
weigh speed against safety in determining whether such a check is desirable.  A
good compiler should be able to produce code with such checks, should avoid
redundant checks, and should allow programmers to control the extent and type
of error checking in the compiled code.
</p>
<p>Compilers for popular languages, such as C and C++, put hardly any
error-checking operations into running code, so as to make things run as fast
as possible.  As a result, it falls to programmers to explicitly provide error
checking.  Unfortunately, people often neglect to do this, even in critical
applications where speed is not a constraint.  Their programs lead fast and
dangerous lives.  For example, the notorious “Worm” that paralyzed the
Internet in 1988 exploited the <abbr>UNIX</abbr>(tm) operating system’s failure to
check whether the input buffer has overflowed in the finger daemon. (See
<a href="References.xhtml#Spafford-1989">Spafford 1989</a>.)</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT338"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF338"><sup>338</sup></a>
Of course, with either the interpretation or the compilation
strategy we must also implement for the new machine storage allocation, input
and output, and all the various operations that we took as “primitive” in our
discussion of the evaluator and compiler.  One strategy for minimizing work
here is to write as many of these operations as possible in Lisp and then
compile them for the new machine.  Ultimately, everything reduces to a small
kernel (such as garbage collection and the mechanism for applying actual
machine primitives) that is hand-coded for the new machine.</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT339"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF339"><sup>339</sup></a>
This strategy leads to amusing tests of correctness of
the compiler, such as checking whether the compilation of a program on the new
machine, using the compiled compiler, is identical with the compilation of the
program on the original Lisp system.  Tracking down the source of differences
is fun but often frustrating, because the results are extremely sensitive to
minuscule details.</p>
</div>
</div>
<hr />
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="References.xhtml#References" accesskey="n" rel="next">References</a>, Previous: <a href="5_002e5_002e6.xhtml#g_t5_002e5_002e6" accesskey="p" rel="prev">5.5.6</a>, Up: <a href="5_002e5.xhtml#g_t5_002e5" accesskey="u" rel="prev">5.5</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>


</section>
</body>
</html>