<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 5.1, http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<title>Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 5.3</title>

<meta name="description" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 5.3" />
<meta name="keywords" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 5.3" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<link href="index.xhtml#Top" rel="start" title="Top" />
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" rel="index" title="Term Index" />
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents" />
<link href="Chapter-5.xhtml#Chapter-5" rel="prev" title="Chapter 5" />
<link href="5_002e3_002e1.xhtml#g_t5_002e3_002e1" rel="next" title="5.3.1" />
<link href="5_002e2_002e4.xhtml#g_t5_002e2_002e4" rel="prev" title="5.2.4" />

<link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="css/prettify.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<script src="js/jquery.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/footnotes.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/browsertest.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body>
<section><a id="g_t5_002e3"></a>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="5_002e3_002e1.xhtml#g_t5_002e3_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">5.3.1</a>, Previous: <a href="5_002e2_002e4.xhtml#g_t5_002e2_002e4" accesskey="p" rel="prev">5.2.4</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-5.xhtml#Chapter-5" accesskey="u" rel="prev">Chapter 5</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>
<hr />

<a id="Storage-Allocation-and-Garbage-Collection"></a>
<h3 class="section"><span class="secnum">5.3</span><span class="sectitle">Storage Allocation and Garbage Collection</span></h3>

<p>In section <a href="5_002e4.xhtml#g_t5_002e4">5.4</a>, we will show how to implement a Scheme evaluator as a
register machine.  In order to simplify the discussion, we will assume that our
register machines can be equipped with a <a id="index-list_002dstructured-memory"></a>
<em>list-structured memory</em>, in
which the basic operations for manipulating list-structured data are primitive.
Postulating the existence of such a memory is a useful abstraction when one is
focusing on the mechanisms of control in a Scheme interpreter, but this does
not reflect a realistic view of the actual primitive data operations of
contemporary computers.  To obtain a more complete picture of how a Lisp system
operates, we must investigate how list structure can be represented in a way
that is compatible with conventional computer memories.
</p>
<p>There are two considerations in implementing list structure.  The first is
purely an issue of representation: how to represent the “box-and-pointer”
structure of Lisp pairs, using only the storage and addressing capabilities of
typical computer memories.  The second issue concerns the management of memory
as a computation proceeds.  The operation of a Lisp system depends crucially on
the ability to continually create new data objects.  These include objects that
are explicitly created by the Lisp procedures being interpreted as well as
structures created by the interpreter itself, such as environments and argument
lists.  Although the constant creation of new data objects would pose no
problem on a computer with an infinite amount of rapidly addressable memory,
computer memories are available only in finite sizes (more’s the pity).  Lisp
systems thus provide an <a id="index-automatic-storage-allocation"></a>
<em>automatic storage allocation</em> facility to
support the illusion of an infinite memory.  When a data object is no longer
needed, the memory allocated to it is automatically recycled and used to
construct new data objects.  There are various techniques for providing such
automatic storage allocation.  The method we shall discuss in this section is
called <a id="index-garbage-collection"></a>
<em>garbage collection</em>.
</p><table class="menu" style="border-collapse: collapse; border-spacing: 0">
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="5_002e3_002e1.xhtml#g_t5_002e3_002e1" accesskey="1">5.3.1</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Memory as Vectors
</td></tr>
<tr><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top"><a href="5_002e3_002e2.xhtml#g_t5_002e3_002e2" accesskey="2">5.3.2</a>:</td><td>  </td><td style="text-align: left; vertical-align: top">Maintaining the Illusion of Infinite Memory
</td></tr>
</table>

<hr />
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="5_002e3_002e1.xhtml#g_t5_002e3_002e1" accesskey="n" rel="next">5.3.1</a>, Previous: <a href="5_002e2_002e4.xhtml#g_t5_002e2_002e4" accesskey="p" rel="prev">5.2.4</a>, Up: <a href="Chapter-5.xhtml#Chapter-5" accesskey="u" rel="prev">Chapter 5</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>


</section>
</body>
</html>