<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en" lang="en">
<!-- Created by GNU Texinfo 5.1, http://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/ -->
<head>
<title>Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 5.5.6</title>

<meta name="description" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 5.5.6" />
<meta name="keywords" content="Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs, 2e: 5.5.6" />
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />
<meta name="Generator" content="texi2any" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<link href="index.xhtml#Top" rel="start" title="Top" />
<link href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" rel="index" title="Term Index" />
<link href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" rel="contents" title="Table of Contents" />
<link href="5_002e5.xhtml#g_t5_002e5" rel="prev" title="5.5" />
<link href="5_002e5_002e7.xhtml#g_t5_002e5_002e7" rel="next" title="5.5.7" />
<link href="5_002e5_002e5.xhtml#g_t5_002e5_002e5" rel="prev" title="5.5.5" />

<link href="css/style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />
<link href="css/prettify.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" />

<script src="js/jquery.min.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/footnotes.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<script src="js/browsertest.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
</head>

<body>
<section><a id="g_t5_002e5_002e6"></a>
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="5_002e5_002e7.xhtml#g_t5_002e5_002e7" accesskey="n" rel="next">5.5.7</a>, Previous: <a href="5_002e5_002e5.xhtml#g_t5_002e5_002e5" accesskey="p" rel="prev">5.5.5</a>, Up: <a href="5_002e5.xhtml#g_t5_002e5" accesskey="u" rel="prev">5.5</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>
<hr />

<a id="Lexical-Addressing"></a>
<h4 class="subsection"><span class="secnum">5.5.6</span><span class="sectitle">Lexical Addressing</span></h4>

<p>One of the most common optimizations performed by compilers is the optimization
of variable lookup.  Our compiler, as we have implemented it so far, generates
code that uses the <code>lookup-variable-value</code> operation of the evaluator
machine.  This searches for a variable by comparing it with each variable that
is currently bound, working frame by frame outward through the run-time
environment.  This search can be expensive if the frames are deeply nested or
if there are many variables.  For example, consider the problem of looking up
the value of <code>x</code> while evaluating the expression <code>(* x y z)</code> in an
application of the procedure that is returned by
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">let</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">((</span><span class="pln">x </span><span class="lit">3</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">y </span><span class="lit">4</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">lambda</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">a b c d e</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
    </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">let</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">((</span><span class="pln">y </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> a b x</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
          </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">z </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">+</span><span class="pln"> c d x</span><span class="clo">)))</span><span class="pln">
      </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> x y z</span><span class="clo">))))</span></pre></div>

<p>Since a <code>let</code> expression is just syntactic sugar for a <code>lambda</code>
combination, this expression is equivalent to
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">((</span><span class="kwd">lambda</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">x y</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
   </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">lambda</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">a b c d e</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
     </span><span class="opn">((</span><span class="kwd">lambda</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">y z</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> x y z</span><span class="clo">))</span><span class="pln">
      </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> a b x</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
      </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">+</span><span class="pln"> c d x</span><span class="clo">))))</span><span class="pln">
 </span><span class="lit">3</span><span class="pln">
 </span><span class="lit">4</span><span class="clo">)</span></pre></div>

<p>Each time <code>lookup-variable-value</code> searches for <code>x</code>, it must determine
that the symbol <code>x</code> is not <code>eq?</code> to <code>y</code> or <code>z</code> (in the
first frame), nor to <code>a</code>, <code>b</code>, <code>c</code>, <code>d</code>, or <code>e</code> (in
the second frame).  We will assume, for the moment, that our programs do not
use <code>define</code>—that variables are bound only with <code>lambda</code>.  Because
our language is lexically scoped, the run-time environment for any expression
will have a structure that parallels the lexical structure of the program in
which the expression appears.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF330" href="#FOOT330"><sup>330</sup></a> Thus, the
compiler can know, when it analyzes the above expression, that each time the
procedure is applied the variable <code>x</code> in <code>(* x y z)</code> will be found
two frames out from the current frame and will be the first variable in that
frame.
</p>
<p>We can exploit this fact by inventing a new kind of variable-lookup operation,
<code>lexical-address-lookup</code>, that takes as arguments an environment and a
<a id="index-lexical-address"></a>
<em>lexical address</em> that consists of two numbers: a <a id="index-frame-number"></a>
<em>frame number</em>, 
which specifies how many frames to pass over, and a
<a id="index-displacement-number"></a>
<em>displacement number</em>, which specifies how many variables to pass over
in that frame.  <code>Lexical-address-lookup</code> will produce the value of the
variable stored at that lexical address relative to the current environment.
If we add the <code>lexical-address-lookup</code> operation to our machine, we can
make the compiler generate code that references variables using this operation,
rather than <code>lookup-variable-value</code>.  Similarly, our compiled code can use
a new <code>lexical-address-set!</code>  operation instead of
<code>set-variable-value!</code>.
</p>
<p>In order to generate such code, the compiler must be able to determine the
lexical address of a variable it is about to compile a reference to.  The
lexical address of a variable in a program depends on where one is in the code.
For example, in the following program, the address of <code>x</code> in expression
<code>⟨</code><var>e1</var><code>⟩</code> is (2, 0)—two frames back and the first variable in the frame.  At
that point <code>y</code> is at address (0, 0) and <code>c</code> is at address (1, 2).  In
expression <code>⟨</code><var>e2</var><code>⟩</code>, <code>x</code> is at (1, 0), <code>y</code> is at (1, 1), and <code>c</code>
is at (0, 2).
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">((</span><span class="kwd">lambda</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">x y</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
   </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">lambda</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">a b c d e</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
     </span><span class="opn">((</span><span class="kwd">lambda</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">y z</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> ⟨</span><var><span class="pln">e1</span></var><span class="pln">⟩</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
      ⟨</span><var><span class="pln">e2</span></var><span class="pln">⟩
      </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">+</span><span class="pln"> c d x</span><span class="clo">))))</span><span class="pln">
 </span><span class="lit">3</span><span class="pln">
 </span><span class="lit">4</span><span class="clo">)</span></pre></div>

<p>One way for the compiler to produce code that uses lexical addressing is to
maintain a data structure called a <a id="index-compile_002dtime-environment"></a>
<em>compile-time environment</em>.  This
keeps track of which variables will be at which positions in which frames in
the run-time environment when a particular variable-access operation is
executed.  The compile-time environment is a list of frames, each containing a
list of variables.  (There will of course be no values bound to the variables,
since values are not computed at compile time.)  The compile-time environment
becomes an additional argument to <code>compile</code> and is passed along to each
code generator.  The top-level call to <code>compile</code> uses an empty
compile-time environment.  When a <code>lambda</code> body is compiled,
<code>compile-lambda-body</code> extends the compile-time environment by a frame
containing the procedure’s parameters, so that the sequence making up the body
is compiled with that extended environment.  At each point in the compilation,
<code>compile-variable</code> and <code>compile-assignment</code> use the compile-time
environment in order to generate the appropriate lexical addresses.
</p>
<p><a href="#Exercise-5_002e39">Exercise 5.39</a> through <a href="#Exercise-5_002e43">Exercise 5.43</a> describe how to complete this
sketch of the lexical-addressing strategy in order to incorporate lexical
lookup into the compiler.  <a href="#Exercise-5_002e44">Exercise 5.44</a> describes another use for the
compile-time environment.
</p>
<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e39"></a>Exercise 5.39:</strong> Write a procedure
<code>lexical-address-lookup</code> that implements the new lookup operation.  It
should take two arguments—a lexical address and a run-time environment—and
return the value of the variable stored at the specified lexical address.
<code>Lexical-address-lookup</code> should signal an error if the value of the
variable is the symbol <code>*unassigned*</code>.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF331" href="#FOOT331"><sup>331</sup></a> Also write a procedure
<code>lexical-address-set!</code> that implements the operation that changes the
value of the variable at a specified lexical address.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e40"></a>Exercise 5.40:</strong> Modify the compiler to maintain
the compile-time environment as described above.  That is, add a
compile-time-environment argument to <code>compile</code> and the various code
generators, and extend it in <code>compile-lambda-body</code>.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e41"></a>Exercise 5.41:</strong> Write a procedure
<code>find-variable</code> that takes as arguments a variable and a compile-time
environment and returns the lexical address of the variable with respect to
that environment.  For example, in the program fragment that is shown above,
the compile-time environment during the compilation of expression <code>⟨</code><var>e1</var><code>⟩</code> is
<code>((y z) (a b c d e) (x y))</code>.  <code>Find-variable</code> should produce
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">find-variable 
 </span><span class="lit">'c</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">'</span><span class="opn">((</span><span class="pln">y z</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">a b c d e</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">x y</span><span class="clo">)))</span><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="opn">(</span><span class="lit">1</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">2</span><span class="clo">)</span></i><span class="pln">

</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">find-variable 
 </span><span class="lit">'x</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">'</span><span class="opn">((</span><span class="pln">y z</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">a b c d e</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">x y</span><span class="clo">)))</span><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="opn">(</span><span class="lit">2</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">0</span><span class="clo">)</span></i><span class="pln">

</span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">find-variable 
 </span><span class="lit">'w</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="lit">'</span><span class="opn">((</span><span class="pln">y z</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">a b c d e</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pln">x y</span><span class="clo">)))</span><span class="pln">
</span><i><span class="pln">not-found</span></i>
</pre></div>
</blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e42"></a>Exercise 5.42:</strong> Using <code>find-variable</code> from
<a href="#Exercise-5_002e41">Exercise 5.41</a>, rewrite <code>compile-variable</code> and
<code>compile-assignment</code> to output lexical-address instructions.  In cases
where <code>find-variable</code> returns <code>not-found</code> (that is, where the
variable is not in the compile-time environment), you should have the code
generators use the evaluator operations, as before, to search for the binding.
(The only place a variable that is not found at compile time can be is in the
global environment, which is part of the run-time environment but is not part
of the compile-time environment.<a class="footnote_link" id="DOCF332" href="#FOOT332"><sup>332</sup></a>  Thus, if you wish, you may have the evaluator operations look
directly in the global environment, which can be obtained with the operation
<code>(op get-global-environment)</code>, instead of having them search the whole
run-time environment found in <code>env</code>.)  Test the modified compiler on a few
simple cases, such as the nested <code>lambda</code> combination at the beginning of
this section.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e43"></a>Exercise 5.43:</strong> We argued in <a href="4_002e1_002e6.xhtml#g_t4_002e1_002e6">4.1.6</a>
that internal definitions for block structure should not be considered “real”
<code>define</code>s.  Rather, a procedure body should be interpreted as if the
internal variables being defined were installed as ordinary <code>lambda</code>
variables initialized to their correct values using <code>set!</code>.  
<a href="4_002e1_002e6.xhtml#g_t4_002e1_002e6">4.1.6</a> and <a href="4_002e1_002e6.xhtml#Exercise-4_002e16">Exercise 4.16</a> showed how to modify the metacircular
interpreter to accomplish this by scanning out internal definitions.  Modify
the compiler to perform the same transformation before it compiles a procedure
body.
</p></blockquote>

<blockquote>
<p><strong><a id="Exercise-5_002e44"></a>Exercise 5.44:</strong> In this section we have focused
on the use of the compile-time environment to produce lexical addresses.  But
there are other uses for compile-time environments.  For instance, in
<a href="5_002e5_002e5.xhtml#Exercise-5_002e38">Exercise 5.38</a> we increased the efficiency of compiled code by open-coding
primitive procedures.  Our implementation treated the names of open-coded
procedures as reserved words.  If a program were to rebind such a name, the
mechanism described in <a href="5_002e5_002e5.xhtml#Exercise-5_002e38">Exercise 5.38</a> would still open-code it as a
primitive, ignoring the new binding.  For example, consider the procedure
</p>
<div class="lisp">
<pre class="lisp prettyprinted" style=""><span class="opn">(</span><span class="kwd">lambda</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">+</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> a b x y</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln">
  </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">+</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> a x</span><span class="clo">)</span><span class="pln"> </span><span class="opn">(</span><span class="pun">*</span><span class="pln"> b y</span><span class="clo">)))</span></pre></div>

<p>which computes a linear combination of <code>x</code> and <code>y</code>.  We might call it
with arguments <code>+matrix</code>, <code>*matrix</code>, and four matrices, but the
open-coding compiler would still open-code the <code>+</code> and the <code>*</code> in
<code>(+ (* a x) (* b y))</code> as primitive <code>+</code> and <code>*</code>.  Modify the
open-coding compiler to consult the compile-time environment in order to
compile the correct code for expressions involving the names of primitive
procedures.  (The code will work correctly as long as the program does not
<code>define</code> or <code>set!</code> these names.)
</p></blockquote>

<div class="footnote">
<hr />

<h4 class="footnotes-heading">Footnotes</h4>

<div id="FOOT330"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF330"><sup>330</sup></a>
This is not true if we allow internal
definitions, unless we scan them out.  See <a href="#Exercise-5_002e43">Exercise 5.43</a>.  </p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT331"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF331"><sup>331</sup></a>
This is the modification
to variable lookup required if we implement the scanning method to eliminate
internal definitions (<a href="#Exercise-5_002e43">Exercise 5.43</a>).  We will need to eliminate these
definitions in order for lexical addressing to work.</p>
</div>
<div id="FOOT332"><p><a class="footnote_backlink" href="#DOCF332"><sup>332</sup></a>
Lexical addresses cannot be used to
access variables in the global environment, because these names can be defined
and redefined interactively at any time.  With internal definitions scanned
out, as in <a href="#Exercise-5_002e43">Exercise 5.43</a>, the only definitions the compiler sees are
those at top level, which act on the global environment.  Compilation of a
definition does not cause the defined name to be entered in the compile-time
environment.</p>
</div>
</div>
<hr />
<nav class="header">
<p>
Next: <a href="5_002e5_002e7.xhtml#g_t5_002e5_002e7" accesskey="n" rel="next">5.5.7</a>, Previous: <a href="5_002e5_002e5.xhtml#g_t5_002e5_002e5" accesskey="p" rel="prev">5.5.5</a>, Up: <a href="5_002e5.xhtml#g_t5_002e5" accesskey="u" rel="prev">5.5</a>   [<a href="index.xhtml#SEC_Contents" title="Table of contents" accesskey="c" rel="contents">Contents</a>][<a href="Term-Index.xhtml#Term-Index" title="Index" accesskey="i" rel="index">Index</a>]</p>
</nav>


</section>
</body>
</html>